README.md, before:

# 4D Gaussian Splatting (4DGS)

## Overview

4D Gaussian Splatting is a method for reconstructing and rendering dynamic 3D scenes from video sequences. This implementation extends 3D Gaussian Splatting to handle temporal dynamics through velocity-based motion modeling, enabling real-time photorealistic rendering of moving objects and scenes.

## Key Techniques

- **4D Gaussian Primitives**: Each Gaussian has position, scale, rotation, opacity, color (spherical harmonics), and velocity components
- **Velocity-based Motion Model**: Positions evolve over time as x(t) = x₀ + v*t
- **Temporal Consistency**: Specialized losses ensure smooth motion without flickering
- **Differentiable Rendering**: Full gradient flow for end-to-end optimization
- **CUDA Acceleration**: Optional gsplat backend for 10-100x faster training

## Major Dependencies

- **PyTorch 2.2.2** with CUDA 12.1 support
- **gsplat 0.1.11** - CUDA-accelerated rasterizer from nerfstudio (optional but recommended)
- **OpenCV** - Video processing and frame extraction
- **imageio-ffmpeg** - Video I/O support


## Hardware Requirements for Training

### Minimum Requirements for Training
- **CPU**: 4+ cores (for data preprocessing)
- **RAM**: 16 GB (32 GB for larger datasets)
- **GPU**: NVIDIA GTX 1060 6GB (CUDA 11.0+)
  - Must have CUDA-capable GPU for training
  - VRAM usage scales with resolution and number of Gaussians
- **Storage**: 50 GB (datasets can be large)

### Recommended for Efficient Training
- **CPU**: 8+ cores (faster preprocessing)
- **RAM**: 32 GB (handle multiple camera views)
- **GPU**: NVIDIA RTX 3070 8GB or better
  - RTX 30/40 series have tensor cores for faster training
  - More VRAM allows larger point clouds and higher resolution
- **Storage**: 100 GB SSD (faster data loading)

### Training Performance by GPU
- **GTX 1060 (6GB VRAM)**: 
  - Max resolution: 720p
  - Max sequence: 10 seconds
  - Max Gaussians: ~20,000
  - Training speed: ~5 min per 1000 iterations
  
- **RTX 3070 (8GB VRAM)**: 
  - Max resolution: 1080p
  - Max sequence: 20 seconds
  - Max Gaussians: ~50,000
  - Training speed: ~2 min per 1000 iterations
  
- **RTX 4090 (24GB VRAM)**:
  - Max resolution: 4K
  - Max sequence: 60+ seconds
  - Max Gaussians: ~100,000+
  - Training speed: ~30 sec per 1000 iterations

**Note**: Rendering trained models requires much less resources - any modern GPU with 4GB+ VRAM can render the outputs.


## Installation

### Prerequisites
- Python 3.8-3.10
- CUDA 11.8 or 12.1
- NVIDIA GPU with compute capability 6.0+

### Steps

#### Option A: Using Conda (Recommended)
```bash
# 1. Clone repository
git clone https://github.com/ECAutomationProjectsAI/4DGS_VibeCoded.git
cd 4DGS_VibeCoded

# 2. Create conda environment from file (includes all dependencies)
conda env create -f environment.yml
conda activate gs4d

# 3. Verify installation
python -c "import torch; print(f'CUDA available: {torch.cuda.is_available()}')"
```

**For RunPod users experiencing NumPy issues:**

RunPod environments can have pre-installed PyTorch that conflicts with our NumPy requirements. Try this more aggressive fix:

```bash
# Method 1: Force downgrade NumPy system-wide
conda activate gs4d
pip uninstall numpy -y
conda install numpy=1.24.3 -c conda-forge --force-reinstall
pip install numpy==1.24.3 --force-reinstall
python -c "import torch; print(f'CUDA available: {torch.cuda.is_available()}')"
```

If that doesn't work, use the RunPod-native installation:

```bash
# Method 2: Use RunPod's pre-installed PyTorch
# Don't create conda environment, use base environment
cd 4DGS_VibeCoded
pip install -r requirements_runpod.txt --force-reinstall
pip install gsplat==0.1.11
python -c "import torch; print(f'CUDA available: {torch.cuda.is_available()}')"
```

**Method 3: Nuclear option for persistent issues:**
```bash
# Completely rebuild the environment
conda remove --name gs4d --all -y
conda create -n gs4d python=3.10 -y
conda activate gs4d
# Install only essential packages
pip install numpy==1.24.3
pip install torch torchvision --index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/cu118
pip install -r requirements_runpod.txt
pip install gsplat==0.1.11
```

**Alternative manual conda setup:**
```bash
# Clone first
git clone https://github.com/ECAutomationProjectsAI/4DGS_VibeCoded.git
cd 4DGS_VibeCoded

# Create environment manually
conda create -n gs4d python=3.10 -y
conda activate gs4d

# Install NumPy first (specific version for compatibility)
conda install numpy=1.24.3 -c conda-forge

# Install PyTorch with CUDA
conda install pytorch==2.2.2 torchvision==0.17.2 pytorch-cuda=12.1 -c pytorch -c nvidia

# Install other dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
pip install gsplat==0.1.11
```

#### Option B: Using venv
```bash
# 1. Clone repository
git clone https://github.com/ECAutomationProjectsAI/4DGS_VibeCoded.git
cd 4DGS_VibeCoded

# 2. Create virtual environment
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # Linux/Mac
venv\Scripts\activate     # Windows

# 3. Install PyTorch with CUDA
pip install torch==2.2.2 torchvision==0.17.2 --index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/cu121

# 4. Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

# 5. Install CUDA acceleration (optional but recommended)
pip install gsplat==0.1.11

# 6. Verify installation
python -c "import torch; print(f'CUDA available: {torch.cuda.is_available()}')"
```

### Docker Alternative

```bash
# Build image
docker build -t gs4d:latest .

# Run with GPU
docker run --gpus all -it gs4d:latest
```


## Input Data Requirements

### Supported Formats
- **Video files**: MP4, AVI, MOV, MKV (any OpenCV-supported format)
- **Image sequences**: JPG, PNG frames with transforms.json
- **Other 4DGS formats**: SpacetimeGaussian PLY, Fudan 4DGS checkpoints

### Data Structure After Processing
```
dataset/
├── frames/           # Extracted frames
│   ├── cam0/        # Camera 0 (required)
│   ├── cam1/        # Camera 1 (optional)
│   └── ...
├── transforms.json   # Camera parameters & timestamps
└── metadata.json     # Processing information
```


## Step-by-Step Workflow

### Step 1: Prepare Video Data

```bash
# Single video
python tools/preprocess_video.py input_video.mp4 -o dataset/

# Multiple synchronized cameras
python tools/preprocess_video.py cam0.mp4 cam1.mp4 cam2.mp4 -o dataset/ \
    --camera-names front left right

# With preprocessing options
python tools/preprocess_video.py video.mp4 -o dataset/ \
    --start 10 --end 30           # Extract 10-30 seconds
    --resize 1280 720              # Resize to 720p
    --extract-every 2              # Extract every 2nd frame
```

### Step 2: Train 4DGS Model

```bash
# Basic training
python tools/train.py --data_root dataset/ --out_dir model/ --iters 10000

# Production training with CUDA acceleration
python tools/train.py \
    --data_root dataset/ \
    --out_dir model/ \
    --iters 30000 \
    --renderer fast \
    --w_temporal 0.01 \
    --sh_degree 3

# For limited GPU memory (<8GB)
python tools/train.py \
    --data_root dataset/ \
    --out_dir model/ \
    --max_points 20000 \
    --sh_degree 1 \
    --iters 10000
```

#### Key Training Parameters
- `--iters`: Number of training iterations (10000-50000 recommended)
- `--renderer`: Use 'fast' for CUDA acceleration, 'naive' for compatibility
- `--w_temporal`: Temporal consistency weight (0.01-0.05)
- `--sh_degree`: Spherical harmonics degree (0-3, higher = better color)
- `--max_points`: Maximum Gaussians (20000-100000 based on GPU memory)


### Step 3: Render Output

```bash
# Basic rendering
python tools/render.py \
    --data_root dataset/ \
    --ckpt model/model_final.pt \
    --out_dir renders/

# High-quality rendering
python tools/render.py \
    --data_root dataset/ \
    --ckpt model/model_final.pt \
    --out_dir renders/ \
    --renderer fast
```

### Step 4: Evaluate Results (Optional)

```bash
# Calculate PSNR and other metrics
python tools/evaluate.py --data_root dataset/ --renders_dir renders/
```

## Additional Tools

### Format Conversion

```bash
# From SpacetimeGaussian PLY format
python tools/convert.py input.ply output.pt --from spacetime --to gs4d

# From Fudan 4DGS checkpoint
python tools/convert.py checkpoint.pth output.pt --from fudan --to gs4d

# To SpacetimeGaussian PLY format
python tools/convert.py model.pt output.ply --from gs4d --to spacetime
```

### Generate Synthetic Test Data

```bash
# Create synthetic dataset for testing
python tools/prepare_synthetic.py --out_root test_data/ --frames 10 --H 256 --W 256
```


## Output

After completing the workflow, you will have:

1. **Trained Model** (`model/model_final.pt`): 4D Gaussian representation of your scene
2. **Rendered Frames** (`renders/`): Reconstructed video frames from novel viewpoints
3. **Metrics** (optional): PSNR, SSIM values for quality assessment

The system produces high-quality dynamic 3D reconstructions that can be:
- Rendered from arbitrary viewpoints
- Played back at different speeds
- Exported to other 4DGS formats
- Used for downstream applications (VR, AR, video editing)

## Troubleshooting

### NumPy Compatibility Error
If you see "A module that was compiled using NumPy 1.x cannot be run in NumPy 2.x":

**For RunPod environments:**
```bash
# Try these solutions in order:

# Solution 1: Force downgrade
conda activate gs4d
pip uninstall numpy -y
pip install numpy==1.24.3 --force-reinstall

# Solution 2: Skip conda, use base environment
cd 4DGS_VibeCoded
pip install -r requirements_runpod.txt --force-reinstall

# Solution 3: Clean install
conda remove --name gs4d --all -y
conda create -n gs4d python=3.10 numpy=1.24.3 -y
conda activate gs4d
pip install torch torchvision --index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/cu118
```

**For other environments:**
```bash
conda activate gs4d
conda install numpy=1.24.3 -c conda-forge --force-reinstall
```

### CUDA Out of Memory
- Reduce `--max_points` (e.g., 20000)
- Lower resolution with `--resize 960 540`
- Extract fewer frames with `--extract-every 3`

### Poor Quality
- Increase iterations: `--iters 50000`
- Adjust temporal weight: `--w_temporal 0.02`
- Use stable footage with good lighting
- Add more camera viewpoints if possible

### Slow Training
- Enable CUDA: `--renderer fast`
- Lower SH degree: `--sh_degree 1`
- Reduce point count: `--max_points 30000`

## References

This implementation integrates techniques from:
- [3D Gaussian Splatting](https://github.com/graphdeco-insa/gaussian-splatting) - Base 3DGS method
- [SpacetimeGaussian](https://github.com/oppo-us-research/SpacetimeGaussian) - Temporal extension
- [Fudan 4DGS](https://github.com/fudan-zvg/4d-gaussian-splatting) - 4D primitives
- [gsplat](https://github.com/nerfstudio-project/gsplat) - CUDA acceleration

Commit message:

Add RunPod installation script and update README to recommend base environment

README.md, after:

# 4D Gaussian Splatting (4DGS)

## Overview

4D Gaussian Splatting is a method for reconstructing and rendering dynamic 3D scenes from video sequences. This implementation extends 3D Gaussian Splatting to handle temporal dynamics through velocity-based motion modeling, enabling real-time photorealistic rendering of moving objects and scenes.

## Key Techniques

- **4D Gaussian Primitives**: Each Gaussian has position, scale, rotation, opacity, color (spherical harmonics), and velocity components
- **Velocity-based Motion Model**: Positions evolve over time as x(t) = x₀ + v*t
- **Temporal Consistency**: Specialized losses ensure smooth motion without flickering
- **Differentiable Rendering**: Full gradient flow for end-to-end optimization
- **CUDA Acceleration**: Optional gsplat backend for 10-100x faster training

## Major Dependencies

- **PyTorch 2.2.2** with CUDA 12.1 support
- **gsplat 0.1.11** - CUDA-accelerated rasterizer from nerfstudio (optional but recommended)
- **OpenCV** - Video processing and frame extraction
- **imageio-ffmpeg** - Video I/O support


## Hardware Requirements for Training

### Minimum Requirements for Training
- **CPU**: 4+ cores (for data preprocessing)
- **RAM**: 16 GB (32 GB for larger datasets)
- **GPU**: NVIDIA GTX 1060 6GB (CUDA 11.0+)
  - Must have CUDA-capable GPU for training
  - VRAM usage scales with resolution and number of Gaussians
- **Storage**: 50 GB (datasets can be large)

### Recommended for Efficient Training
- **CPU**: 8+ cores (faster preprocessing)
- **RAM**: 32 GB (handle multiple camera views)
- **GPU**: NVIDIA RTX 3070 8GB or better
  - RTX 30/40 series have tensor cores for faster training
  - More VRAM allows larger point clouds and higher resolution
- **Storage**: 100 GB SSD (faster data loading)

### Training Performance by GPU
- **GTX 1060 (6GB VRAM)**: 
  - Max resolution: 720p
  - Max sequence: 10 seconds
  - Max Gaussians: ~20,000
  - Training speed: ~5 min per 1000 iterations
  
- **RTX 3070 (8GB VRAM)**: 
  - Max resolution: 1080p
  - Max sequence: 20 seconds
  - Max Gaussians: ~50,000
  - Training speed: ~2 min per 1000 iterations
  
- **RTX 4090 (24GB VRAM)**:
  - Max resolution: 4K
  - Max sequence: 60+ seconds
  - Max Gaussians: ~100,000+
  - Training speed: ~30 sec per 1000 iterations

**Note**: Rendering trained models requires much less resources - any modern GPU with 4GB+ VRAM can render the outputs.


## Installation

### Prerequisites
- Python 3.8-3.10
- CUDA 11.8 or 12.1
- NVIDIA GPU with compute capability 6.0+

### Steps

#### Option A: Using Conda (Recommended)
```bash
# 1. Clone repository
git clone https://github.com/ECAutomationProjectsAI/4DGS_VibeCoded.git
cd 4DGS_VibeCoded

# 2. Create conda environment from file (includes all dependencies)
conda env create -f environment.yml
conda activate gs4d

# 3. Verify installation
python -c "import torch; print(f'CUDA available: {torch.cuda.is_available()}')"
```

**For RunPod users (RECOMMENDED APPROACH):**

RunPod environments work best with the base environment rather than conda. Use this method:

**Option 1: Automated script (easiest)**
```bash
# Clone and run installation script
git clone https://github.com/ECAutomationProjectsAI/4DGS_VibeCoded.git
cd 4DGS_VibeCoded
bash install_runpod.sh
```

**Option 2: Manual installation**
```bash
# Skip conda entirely - use RunPod's base environment
# Make sure you're NOT in a conda environment
conda deactivate  # if you're in a conda env

cd 4DGS_VibeCoded
pip install -r requirements_runpod.txt --force-reinstall
pip install gsplat==0.1.11
python -c "import torch; print(f'CUDA available: {torch.cuda.is_available()}')"
```

**Why this works:** RunPod comes with PyTorch 2.8.0 pre-installed in the base environment, which is newer and better than our conda version. Using the base environment avoids NumPy conflicts.

**⚠️ IMPORTANT for RunPod users:** Always run the training/rendering commands in the **base environment** (no `conda activate` needed). If you activate conda, the NumPy conflicts will return.

**Alternative (if you must use conda):**

```bash
# Only try this if base environment doesn't work
conda activate gs4d
pip uninstall numpy -y
conda install numpy=1.24.3 -c conda-forge --force-reinstall
pip install numpy==1.24.3 --force-reinstall
python -c "import torch; print(f'CUDA available: {torch.cuda.is_available()}')"
```

**Method 3: Nuclear option for persistent issues:**
```bash
# Completely rebuild the environment
conda remove --name gs4d --all -y
conda create -n gs4d python=3.10 -y
conda activate gs4d
# Install only essential packages
pip install numpy==1.24.3
pip install torch torchvision --index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/cu118
pip install -r requirements_runpod.txt
pip install gsplat==0.1.11
```

**Alternative manual conda setup:**
```bash
# Clone first
git clone https://github.com/ECAutomationProjectsAI/4DGS_VibeCoded.git
cd 4DGS_VibeCoded

# Create environment manually
conda create -n gs4d python=3.10 -y
conda activate gs4d

# Install NumPy first (specific version for compatibility)
conda install numpy=1.24.3 -c conda-forge

# Install PyTorch with CUDA
conda install pytorch==2.2.2 torchvision==0.17.2 pytorch-cuda=12.1 -c pytorch -c nvidia

# Install other dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
pip install gsplat==0.1.11
```

#### Option B: Using venv
```bash
# 1. Clone repository
git clone https://github.com/ECAutomationProjectsAI/4DGS_VibeCoded.git
cd 4DGS_VibeCoded

# 2. Create virtual environment
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # Linux/Mac
venv\Scripts\activate     # Windows

# 3. Install PyTorch with CUDA
pip install torch==2.2.2 torchvision==0.17.2 --index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/cu121

# 4. Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

# 5. Install CUDA acceleration (optional but recommended)
pip install gsplat==0.1.11

# 6. Verify installation
python -c "import torch; print(f'CUDA available: {torch.cuda.is_available()}')"
```

### Docker Alternative

```bash
# Build image
docker build -t gs4d:latest .

# Run with GPU
docker run --gpus all -it gs4d:latest
```


## Input Data Requirements

### Supported Formats
- **Video files**: MP4, AVI, MOV, MKV (any OpenCV-supported format)
- **Image sequences**: JPG, PNG frames with transforms.json
- **Other 4DGS formats**: SpacetimeGaussian PLY, Fudan 4DGS checkpoints

### Data Structure After Processing
```
dataset/
├── frames/           # Extracted frames
│   ├── cam0/        # Camera 0 (required)
│   ├── cam1/        # Camera 1 (optional)
│   └── ...
├── transforms.json   # Camera parameters & timestamps
└── metadata.json     # Processing information
```


## Step-by-Step Workflow

### Step 1: Prepare Video Data

```bash
# Single video
python tools/preprocess_video.py input_video.mp4 -o dataset/

# Multiple synchronized cameras
python tools/preprocess_video.py cam0.mp4 cam1.mp4 cam2.mp4 -o dataset/ \
    --camera-names front left right

# With preprocessing options
python tools/preprocess_video.py video.mp4 -o dataset/ \
    --start 10 --end 30           # Extract 10-30 seconds
    --resize 1280 720              # Resize to 720p
    --extract-every 2              # Extract every 2nd frame
```

### Step 2: Train 4DGS Model

```bash
# Basic training
python tools/train.py --data_root dataset/ --out_dir model/ --iters 10000

# Production training with CUDA acceleration
python tools/train.py \
    --data_root dataset/ \
    --out_dir model/ \
    --iters 30000 \
    --renderer fast \
    --w_temporal 0.01 \
    --sh_degree 3

# For limited GPU memory (<8GB)
python tools/train.py \
    --data_root dataset/ \
    --out_dir model/ \
    --max_points 20000 \
    --sh_degree 1 \
    --iters 10000
```

#### Key Training Parameters
- `--iters`: Number of training iterations (10000-50000 recommended)
- `--renderer`: Use 'fast' for CUDA acceleration, 'naive' for compatibility
- `--w_temporal`: Temporal consistency weight (0.01-0.05)
- `--sh_degree`: Spherical harmonics degree (0-3, higher = better color)
- `--max_points`: Maximum Gaussians (20000-100000 based on GPU memory)


### Step 3: Render Output

```bash
# Basic rendering
python tools/render.py \
    --data_root dataset/ \
    --ckpt model/model_final.pt \
    --out_dir renders/

# High-quality rendering
python tools/render.py \
    --data_root dataset/ \
    --ckpt model/model_final.pt \
    --out_dir renders/ \
    --renderer fast
```

### Step 4: Evaluate Results (Optional)

```bash
# Calculate PSNR and other metrics
python tools/evaluate.py --data_root dataset/ --renders_dir renders/
```

## Additional Tools

### Format Conversion

```bash
# From SpacetimeGaussian PLY format
python tools/convert.py input.ply output.pt --from spacetime --to gs4d

# From Fudan 4DGS checkpoint
python tools/convert.py checkpoint.pth output.pt --from fudan --to gs4d

# To SpacetimeGaussian PLY format
python tools/convert.py model.pt output.ply --from gs4d --to spacetime
```

### Generate Synthetic Test Data

```bash
# Create synthetic dataset for testing
python tools/prepare_synthetic.py --out_root test_data/ --frames 10 --H 256 --W 256
```


## Output

After completing the workflow, you will have:

1. **Trained Model** (`model/model_final.pt`): 4D Gaussian representation of your scene
2. **Rendered Frames** (`renders/`): Reconstructed video frames from novel viewpoints
3. **Metrics** (optional): PSNR, SSIM values for quality assessment

The system produces high-quality dynamic 3D reconstructions that can be:
- Rendered from arbitrary viewpoints
- Played back at different speeds
- Exported to other 4DGS formats
- Used for downstream applications (VR, AR, video editing)

## Troubleshooting

### NumPy Compatibility Error
If you see "A module that was compiled using NumPy 1.x cannot be run in NumPy 2.x":

**For RunPod environments:**
```bash
# Try these solutions in order:

# Solution 1: Force downgrade
conda activate gs4d
pip uninstall numpy -y
pip install numpy==1.24.3 --force-reinstall

# Solution 2: Skip conda, use base environment
cd 4DGS_VibeCoded
pip install -r requirements_runpod.txt --force-reinstall

# Solution 3: Clean install
conda remove --name gs4d --all -y
conda create -n gs4d python=3.10 numpy=1.24.3 -y
conda activate gs4d
pip install torch torchvision --index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/cu118
```

**For other environments:**
```bash
conda activate gs4d
conda install numpy=1.24.3 -c conda-forge --force-reinstall
```

### CUDA Out of Memory
- Reduce `--max_points` (e.g., 20000)
- Lower resolution with `--resize 960 540`
- Extract fewer frames with `--extract-every 3`

### Poor Quality
- Increase iterations: `--iters 50000`
- Adjust temporal weight: `--w_temporal 0.02`
- Use stable footage with good lighting
- Add more camera viewpoints if possible

### Slow Training
- Enable CUDA: `--renderer fast`
- Lower SH degree: `--sh_degree 1`
- Reduce point count: `--max_points 30000`

## References

This implementation integrates techniques from:
- [3D Gaussian Splatting](https://github.com/graphdeco-insa/gaussian-splatting) - Base 3DGS method
- [SpacetimeGaussian](https://github.com/oppo-us-research/SpacetimeGaussian) - Temporal extension
- [Fudan 4DGS](https://github.com/fudan-zvg/4d-gaussian-splatting) - 4D primitives
- [gsplat](https://github.com/nerfstudio-project/gsplat) - CUDA acceleration
